Accessibility is closely related to usability,
which we discussed in the previous lesson.
When websites or apps are poorly designed,
they create accessibility barriers.
This makes it difficult or even impossible
for some people to use it.
Combining accessibility and usability standards
ensures that it is usable for everyone.
Access for all is essential.
The United Nations defines access to information
as a fundamental human right.
To provide equal access and opportunities
for people of different abilities.
And in more and more countries, meeting basic
accessibility standards has become a legal rule.
So accessibility is no longer just a nice
thing to have.
The problem, however, is that we often idealize
our users.
As a result, we rarely think of disabilities
as potential friction points for
a users' interaction with a product.
So we fail to design a solution,
which means they continue
to struggle to use our products.
It is therefore crucial to test your designs
for accessibility.
Special needs can be divided
into the following categories:
Visual. These are sensitivity disorders.
Examples are color blindness,
visual impairment or blindness.
Auditory disabilities range from mild hearing
loss in one or both ears to complete deafness.
Some people with hearing impairments
can hear sounds
but sometimes not enough to understand all speech.
Especially if there is background noise.
Motor. These are physical limitations.
Examples include limitations in muscle control,
limitations of sensation, joint disorders,
pain that interferes with movement, or missing
limbs.
Cognitive disabilities include neurological
disorders, as well as behavioral
and mental health disorders.
They influence how well people understand
information.
Speech disabilities include problems producing
speech that is recognizable to others.
For example, the loudness or clarity of a
person's voice can be difficult to understand.
From stuttering to silence.
It’s important to know that not all disabilities
are permanent.
The limitations can also be temporary or situational.
You should also consider how a situation can
affect the visual, auditory or motor skills
of your users.
To do this, you need to consider the context
of your user journeys.
Are there any tasks that are usually performed
while the user is on the move and thus has
limited mobility?
Or in the dark, where visibility is limited.
Is the user using your app in a noisy place,
limiting hearing capabilities?
Or is the person in a situation that causes
a lot of stress, which can affect thinking
and understanding.
These limitations can be permanent, temporary
or situational.
Permanent.
These are people with disabilities, such as
loss of limbs, vision, hearing, or speech.
Temporary is when a person has short-term
injuries—for example, wearing a plaster cast.
Temporary loss of vision because of cataract.
Or if a person suffers from an ear infection.
These temporary limitations can occur as a
result of an accident, surgery, or medication.
Situational.
This is when people experience limitations
due to situational aspects.
For example, a new parent holding her child
in her arms.
A driver who is distracted when operating
the radio or navigation.
Or if they see less because of bright sunlight.
Or a bartender who has a bad hearing in a
crowded bar due to a loud environment.
Accessibility is not a barrier to design.
On the contrary, although accessibility is
primarily aimed at people with disabilities,
it ultimately benefits everybody.
It allows users to interact with products
in different ways, making it more user-friendly.
Let's look at two real-life examples where
everybody benefits from accessible design.
Forms of voice control such as Siri, Google
Assistant, and Alexa were intended to allow
visually impaired people to easily navigate
their devices by voice.
Everyone now uses voice control for all sorts
of things, such as checking the weather, playing
music, turning on lights, or looking up information.
Subtitles were intended for the deaf and hard
of hearing.
They now benefit everyone.
For example, to understand the content when
you are in a noisy environment.
Or where you need to be quiet.
An increasing proportion of YouTube videos
are watched with subtitles only.
Now that we've established that accessible
design benefits everybody.
Let's take a look at how it benefits businesses.
A few examples.
Expend the market reach
It is often thought that people with disabilities
are only a small target group.
Yet, according to the World Health Organization,
15% of the world is disabled, equal to more
than a billion people.
Designing products accessible to this community
will increase market reach and income.
Improved usability.
If a website or app works well for people
with special needs, it will work well for
all users.
Usability improvements increase repeat users,
conversions, and therefore revenue.
Improved Search Engine Optimization.
Many of the accessibility guidelines are the
same as search engine optimization techniques.
Search engine bots can only use text content,
so they see web pages the same way a blind
user would.
Improving accessibility also means improving
search results.
Richer experiences.
Accessibility guidelines advocate using multiple
views to make content more understandable
and useful.
This makes experiences richer for other users
as there is a variety of content types.
In WhatsApp, for example, everyone can choose
how they want to communicate.
Via text, speech, images, gifs, or emoticons.
This provides a more personalized, engaging
experience for all users.
Easier maintenance:
Designing and developing for accessibility
usually means following standards.
It's much easier to support and maintain designs
and code created to known standards.
Positive brand values.
Major brands, including Apple, have paved
the way for accessible design.
By supporting accessibility for marginalized
groups, you generate positive feelings for
your brand.
This ensures credibility and strengthens loyalty.
More and more countries are enacting legislation
on the accessibility of digital products.
Web accessibility is already a legal requirement
in many situations.
Design always starts with empathy.
But accessible design is something that many
people are not familiar with.
As beautiful as designs are, they are not
always functional and do not match the wishes
of the users.
In-depth research is therefore necessary.
Observe how people use your product in their
environment and identify their needs.
Collecting this knowledge is crucial to making
accessible products.
I’ll share some best practices and guidelines
to keep in mind when designing for accessibility.
Visually impaired people depend on changing
the presentation into shapes that better suit
their specific needs.
For example, if your audience is a bit older
or visually impaired, spend extra time on readability.
After all, large text is easier to read.
Make customizable settings for increasing
and decreasing text size or spacing.
So that people can adapt to what suits them.
They also often use magnifiers.
Make sure that the text can be enlarged without
losing its structure.
Color blindness is real and more common than
you might think.
Use colors and contrast so that both colorblind
and partially sighted people can distinguish
text and objects.
This means choosing and testing
color combinations carefully.
Using high contrast and making sure not only
color is used to convey information.
Always ensure that important information has
extra elements, such as icons or text, to
support the color.
Visually impaired people may prefer to use
a keyboard or speech recognition software
for input, as they cannot see the mouse pointer.
For a website, it is important that it can
be operated with a keyboard.
Visually impaired people use software called
screen readers to read everything on the web.
Make sure you follow the guidelines to ensure
that a website can be read by a screen reader
and that all elements follow
a natural reading structure.
Multimedia on the web offers many possibilities
for people with a hearing impairment.
But it also presents a challenge when content
is not designed to be accessible.
Video content is an important tool to convey
information visually.
It is important that there are alternatives,
such as text transcription or subtitling,
to make this information accessible to the
deaf and hard of hearing.
For the hearing impaired,
high-quality foreground sound
which is distinguishable from background noise,
is very important.
Such as the options to stop, pause and adjust
the volume of audio content.
For some people with hearing disabilities,
sign language is the primary language.
They may not read the
written language very fluently.
Providing important information in sign language
and using simpler text supplemented with images,
charts and other illustrations makes web content
more understandable for many people.
Some people cannot use a mouse, including
many older users with limited fine motor skills.
An accessible website does not depend on the
mouse.
It makes all functionality available from
a keyboard.
People with reduced mobility use a range of
assistive technologies, depending on the severity
of the disability.
Most of these work via the keyboard, so providing
full keyboard access to a website is an important
first step in accessibility.
Also objects or moving elements that are too
small make interaction with a site or app
difficult for this group.
Providing large clickable areas, sufficient
time to complete tasks, and error correction
options for forms are important design aspects.
People with cognitive, learning, and neurological
disabilities often rely on:
Clearly structured content that facilitates
overview and orientation.
This helps people with a wide range of special
needs to understand and navigate a website.
Make sure the reading level of your website
is as simple and clear as possible for the
intended audience.
Use simple words, and simpler grammar, which
is supplemented with pictures, charts, and
other illustrations.
So that people who are not very good at your
language can read without much effort.
Make the content shorter so that the listening
does not take too long.
Make it easy to jump within long pages.
Make it easy to scan.
Limit the use of noticeable but unimportant
elements and animations such as scrolling
text and popups.
Speech-impaired people face barriers to speech-based
services, such as a telephone help desk as
the sole means of communicating with an organization.
Alternative means of communication such as
email or a text chat to communicate help this group.
To make products more accessible, it's good
to have some guidelines.
The internationally recognized standards
for websites are the
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines.
They have a set of guidelines organized under
4 principles:
Perceivable
Operable
Understandable
Robust
The first principle focuses on making content
available and recognizable to all users.
Regardless of how the user perceives information
or the tools they use to access it, such as
screen readers.
A few examples:
An example guideline is to provide text alternatives
for non-text content.
This can be changed to other forms that people
need.
Such as large letters, braille, speech, symbols,
or simpler language.
An example is an ALT tag in the code of web
pages.
You see a photo, but someone with a screen
reader hears what the photo is about.
Provide synchronized alternatives to multimedia.
Such as video subtitles or transcripts.
Create content that can be presented in different
ways without losing information, meaning,
or structure.
For example with a simpler layout.
Sighted users scan and read content through
visual cues such as headlines or bold text.
Likewise, web content must be structured in
a logical way so that assistive technology
can process it and translate it to the user.
Make it easier for users to see and hear content.
Never use color just to convey important information,
such as error messages.
If the only sign of an error message in a
form is a red border in front of the input field
it may not be noticed by
visually impaired people.
So add text and a descriptive visual element
like an icon.
The second principle states that all components
of the user interface and navigation must
be operational.
An example guideline is to make all functionality
available from a keyboard.
In this way, you offer the user an alternative
means of navigation.
For example, a user can navigate a web page
using only the tab key on the keyboard.
But also make it easier to use inputs other
than the keyboard.
Give users plenty of time to read and use
the content.
For example, when the user's session is about
to end, as you often see on a bank website.
The user should always have the option to
continue the session and not be logged out
without warning.
Do not use content that causes seizures or
physical reactions.
So limit the use of flashing elements.
Help users navigate, find content, and determine
where they are.
Breadcrumbs are a good example
of secondary navigation.
This gives the user a visual representation
of his exact location on the site.
It is good practice to make these steps clickable
so that the user can move forward or backward
in their journey.
The third principle focuses on simplifying
the content so that it is easy to understand.
The user must know how to operate the user
interface and access information
Make text readable and understandable.
So don't use words and phrases that could
be misunderstood.
Be sure to set the language in a webpage's
code so screen readers can access it.
Make content appear and work in predictable
ways.
Notify the user if an action will change the
context of the user experience.
For example, when you change the language
or country.
Also, be careful about adding links that open
new windows.
This can be disorienting to the user if they
have no visual context about what is happening.
Help users avoid and correct mistakes.
Prevent the user from entering incorrect data.
For example, by labeling the input fields
with visible and descriptive labels.
If the user is expected to enter a contact
number, no alphabetic characters are allowed
to be entered.
The last principle - robust - focuses on compatibility
with current and future user tools.
The content and its interpretation must be
reliable and compatible with different devices,
browsers and assistive technologies.
As technology evolves, content still needs
to be accessible on as many devices and
user agents as possible.
To maximize compatibility with future user
tools, the websites should be built to known
and credible technical standards.
To achieve compliance, there are testable
success criteria for each guideline, that
reflect the priority of support:
A is for essential: If not, assistive technology
may not be able to read, understand, or operate
the page or display.
AA: Ideal support.
Required for many government websites.
AAA means specialized support.
This is usually reserved for parts of websites
and web apps that serve a specialized audience.
Triple-A compliance usually requires a website
to be built from scratch with accessibility
in mind.
You can find the link to the complete checklist
below this video.
As you can see, accessibility is complicated.
An accessibility evaluation is not a simple
pass or fail test.
Instead, it's a holistic assessment of the
content, design, and code.
Aiming to highlight areas that users are likely
to find challenging.
No interface is fully accessible, so the accessibility
evaluation is an ongoing process.
There are four methods for conducting accessibility
evaluation that can be used alone or in combination
with each other.
Automated evaluation
Manual evaluation
Usability testing
Assistive technology testing
There are many tools that help streamline
the evaluation process.
Some focus on specific aspects of digital
accessibility, such as color contrast validator.
Other tools such as WAVE perform a general
check and help uncover important structural
issues that are difficult to spot on complex
interfaces.
The WebAIM browser extension is as simple
as opening the website in the browser and
a window will open on the left with a list
of errors.
W3 has an extensive list of web accessibility
assessment tools for all levels and purposes.
They are a good starting point for the evaluation
process.
But, they do not cover all accessibility issues
and should not completely replace a manual audit.
To know if you have taken accessibility and
assistive technologies into account, you also
need to test manually.
This is a process of checking and reviewing
the interface against a list of standards
and making recommendations for improvement.
This is time-consuming.
It often takes longer to view and interact
with websites if you have a disability, so
simulating a disability will experience the
same delays.
This is useful because it is valuable to be
aware of the difficulties users are experiencing.
Test your product in different browsers, on
different devices, and on operating systems.
Download a screen reader or use the built-in
for your operating system and view your website
through it.
Navigate your website using only a keyboard.
Boost your fonts up to 200% and see what it
does to your website.
Change the viewport to responsive, then resize
it to any size and see what happens to your website.
Test how your website works on a slow
2G or 3G connection.
And so on …
A web accessibility assessment is usually
performed based on the
web content accessibility guidelines.
You can use this as a comprehensive checklist.
Or you can use another checklist, such as
Gibson's Accessibility Matrix.
Links to these checklists
can be found below the video.
You can already take many steps through this
automatic and manual accessibility assessment.
But, nothing beats observing real people with
impaired abilities using your interface.
Getting feedback on the challenges they face.
The process is like a standard usability test:
each user is asked to perform a series of
common tasks on the interface and to comment
on things that work well and areas that could
be improved.
These sessions should be conducted in person,
to give the observer an accurate picture of
the wider context and any tools
or interactions off-screen.
Many users with limited skills rely on assistive
technologies to help them navigate the interface,
so it's important to be aware of what this
process can look like and the potential challenges
users may face.
This can be done as part of the manual evaluation
process, usability testing, or both.
I hope you got a better idea of what accessibility
means.
It is a complex and continuously changing
field, so even after this lesson
it is good to stay informed about this topic.
First. Let's summarize what we've covered
in this lesson.
Accessibility is closely related to usability,
which we discussed in the previous lesson.
Combining accessibility and usability standards
ensures that it is usable for everyone.
Access for all is essential.
The United Nations defines access to information
as a fundamental human right.
And in more and more countries, meeting basic
accessibility standards has become a legal rule.
Special needs can be divided into the following
categories:
Visual.
These are sensitivity disorders.
Examples are color blindness, visual impairment,
or blindness.
Auditory disabilities range from mild hearing
loss to complete deafness.
Motor. These are physical limitations.
Cognitive disabilities include neurological
disorders, as well as behavioral
and mental health disorders.
Speech disorders include problems producing
speech that is recognizable to others.
It is important to know that not all disabilities
are permanent.
The limitations can also be temporary or situational.
You should also consider how a situation can
affect your users' visual, auditory, or motor skills.
Accessibility is not a barrier to design.
On the contrary, although accessibility is
primarily aimed at people with disabilities,
it ultimately benefits everyone.
And it is good for business as well.
Design always starts with empathy.
But accessible design is something that many
people are not familiar with.
As beautiful as designs are, they are not
always functional and do not match the wishes
of the user.
In-depth research is therefore necessary.
To make products more accessible, it's good
to have some guidelines.
We've looked at the internationally recognized
standards for websites:
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines.
They have a set of guidelines organized under
4 principles:
Perceivable
Operable
Understandable
Robust
An accessibility evaluation is not a simple
pass or fail test.
Instead, it's a holistic assessment of the
content, design, and code.
There are four methods for conducting accessibility
evaluation that can be used alone or in combination
with each other.
Automated evaluation
Manual evaluation
Usability testing
Assistive technology testing
Empathizing and understanding the user is
crucial to design for accessibility.
To design for people.
In the next lesson on user research, I'll
tell you how to understand user behavior,
needs, and their pain points.